---
layout: post
title: "Corporate consolidation, how companies ate themselves sick"
description: "how products keep going from bad to worse for the end user"
date: 2026-01-28
feature_image: images/corpobiz.jpg
tags: [DVDs, Physical-Media, opinion, personal]
---

I remember when my dad came home with his first smartphone. It was a [Motorola Droid](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Motorola_Droid), and it was the craziest thing my sister and I had ever seen. Before this, he had a Palm TX, and while that was impressive to us as kids, this new phone was clearly something else altogether. The idea that it had a camera, could call people, and even run these new little programs called “apps” was astounding to us. We would sit together on the couch and take turns marveling at all the features, stupid flashlight apps, lightsaber sounds, and elephants that would squeak and spin when you clicked on them.

<!--more-->

More than any of this, I remember when my dad came back from Verizon with his next phone, the Motorola [Droid Turbo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Droid_Turbo), and how much of a jump in technology that phone felt like. It was impossibly thin, the camera was impossibly good, and the screen quality was out of this world for the day. At the time, if you told me that would be the last phone to truly impress me, I would not have believed you in a million years. As a kid, I really did believe that technology would keep advancing to improve our lives. That generation of phones is where the steady march of technological improvement seemed to stop, and a pivot to squeezing the consumer began. 

Now, each phone release offers less to get excited for; new features are just more unwanted AI, forced tracking, and incremental upgrades for a disproportionate price increase. Our phones moved from tools that threatened to replace all other devices and speed up our daily tasks, to boxes that suck us in, harvesting our engagement, watch time, and identities so that the likes of Mark Zuckerberg can buy a second island for his [apocalypse bunker](https://www.wired.com/story/mark-zuckerberg-inside-hawaii-compound/) in Hawaii. 

Throughout history, consumer products have gotten cheaper, and costs have been cut over time as their markets reach maturity. This is just the nature of consumer mass market goods. However, I believe that what is happening right now across industries is something different entirely.

The rapid progress of corporate consolidation has led to duopolies or even monopolies in thousands of individual sectors that remove the need to try to compete for business, and the only person who loses is the average American. If you have only two phone ecosystems to choose from, when both Apple and Google force unwanted generative AI down your throat for double the price, you are left with nowhere to turn, and Google and Apple know it. 

This extends beyond physical goods. When Netflix, Disney+, Paramount+, and HBO ([soon to be also Netflix](https://about.netflix.com/en/news/netflix-and-warner-bros-discovery-amend-agreement-to-all-cash-transaction)) all raise their prices, you have no choice but to pay them if you want to keep watching the show you are halfway done with. When you have three seasons left, and you get the message that the show is leaving that streaming service in a week, how can you not follow it to another platform? This just results in the amount that show costs increasing by almost double for little additional value. They have systematically removed and segmented content so that the average consumer is stuck with multiple subscriptions for increasingly crappy and expensive services. 

While the total cost in the short-term might still be lower than if you were to buy all the films new on Blu-ray, the real loss is that the consumer is left with nothing as soon as they cancel, as opposed to physical media, where you end up with a tangible asset that can be donated, gifted, and shared with friends. In the long-term, Blu-ray is also cheaper, with just one year of Netflix costing 215 dollars for a [standard plan](https://help.netflix.com/en/node/24926), and over ten years, assuming no price changes, it will cost $2158. These greater profits are the incentive to monopolize entertainment, it allows them to squeeze the consumer for more dollars while offering less value.

The same trend is true beyond big tech and entertainment. Companies across industries have been buying up competition and monopolizing their markets, forcing consumers to choose between increasingly limited options. Since the year 1985, corporate mergers worldwide have gone from just 2,676 to 39,494 in 2025, according to the pro-mergers [IMAA](https://imaa-institute.org/mergers-and-acquisitions-statistics/) trade group. That is a 14.75 times increase between 1985 and 2025.

The incentive for Electrolux or Whirlpool to make a better refrigerator than the competition is gone since there are now fewer and fewer [major US appliance manufacturers](https://www.familyhandyman.com/article/who-makes-my-appliances/). The consumer has only the illusion of choice. If they have a bad experience with one of Whirlpool’s products, there is a solid chance that the replacement brand they buy is unknowingly still a sub-brand of Whirlpool.

This broken rewards structure is what leads companies to instead focus on milking the consumer. [Fridges now have subscription plans](https://www.pcmag.com/news/lg-wants-you-to-subscribe-to-your-fridge?test_uuid=04IpBmWGZleS0I0J3epvMrC&test_variant=B) just to activate features that are already [built into the device](https://www.autoevolution.com/news/tesla-prepares-to-turn-the-heated-front-seats-and-wipers-into-paid-features-224519.html) that you own. Harvesting data, with smart Wi-Fi-enabled products that track what brands you buy and sell to advertisers to increase the effectiveness of targeted ads you see when you scroll through the all-encompassing void that Instagram has turned into. 

Until America takes antitrust and merger enforcement seriously, things will continue to get worse for the average American. [Lina Khan’s](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lina_Khan) time at the FTC was one of the only periods of progressive antitrust and merger enforcement in decades, and she was put on the hot seat by both [Democratic and Republican](https://www.nytimes.com/2024/11/05/technology/election-2024-ftc-lina-khan.html) corporate donors as a result. Being aware of the root cause of why products are getting worse can help the public push for greater enforcement where it matters. This did not happen overnight, and it will take decades of corrective action to undo, but pushing progressives to take on the mantle of merger enforcement is one of the only tools left in our limited toolbox. 

The only way that consumer goods and technology improve is when there is a healthy ecosystem of companies fighting for your dollar and attention. Corporations are not your friends, and they should not be treated as such. There is no such thing as money for nothing, and no company will make a better product out of the goodness of their heart.